Harry turned to look at Ron and Hermione. Neither of them seemed to have
understood what Xenophilius had said either.
"The Deathly Hallows?"
"That's right," said Xenophilius. "You haven't heard of them? I'm not surprised.
Very, very few wizards believe. Witness that knuckle-headed young man at your
brother's wedding," he nodded at Ron, "who attacked me for sporting the symbol of a
well-known Dark wizard! Such ignorance. There is nothing Dark about the Hallows – at
least not in that crude sense. One simply uses the symbol to reveal oneself to other
believers, in the hope that they might help one with the Quest."
He stirred several lumps of sugar into his Gurdyroot infusion and drank some.
"I'm sorry," said Harry, "I still don't really understand."
To be polite, he took a sip from his cup too, and almost gagged: The stuff was
quite disgusting, as though someone had liquidized bogey-flavored Every Flavor Beans.

"Well, you see, believers seek the Deathly Hallows," said Xenophilius, smacking
his lips in apparent appreciation of the Gurdyroot infusion.
"But what are the Deathly Hallows?" asked Hermione.
Xenophilius set aside his empty teacup.
"I assume that you are familiar with 'The Tale of the Three Brothers'?"
Harry said, "No," but Ron and Hermione both said, "Yes." Xenophilius nodded
gravely.
"Well, well, Mr. Potter, the whole thing starts with 'The Tale of the Three
Brothers' . . . I have a copy somewhere . . ."
He glanced vaguely around the room, at the piles of parchment and books, but
Hermione said, "I've got a copy, Mr. Lovegood, I've got it right here."
And she pulled out The Tales of Beedle the Bard from the small, beaded bag.
"The original?" inquired Xenophilius sharply, and when she nodded, he said,
"Well then, why don't you read it out aloud? Much the best way to make sure we all
understand."
"Er. . . all right," said Hermione nervously. She opened the book, and Harry saw
that the symbol they were investigating headed the top of the page as she gave a little
cough, and began to read.
"'There were once three brothers who were traveling along a lonely, winding road
at twilight –'"
"Midnight, our mum always told us," said Ron, who had stretched out, arms
behind his head, to listen. Hermione shot him a look of annoyance.
"Sorry, I just think it's a bit spookier if it's midnight!" said Ron.
"Yeah, because we really need a bit more fear in our lives," said Harry before he
could stop himself. Xenophilius did not seem to be paying much attention, but was
staring out of the window at the sky. "Go on, Hermione."
"In time, the brothers reached a river too deep to wade through and too
dangerous to swim across. However, these brothers were learned in the magical arts, and
so they simply waved their wands and made a bridge appear across the treacherous
water. They were halfway across it when they found their path blocked by a hooded
figure.
"'And Death spoke to them –'"
"Sorry," interjected Harry, "but Death spoke to them?"
"It's a fairy tale, Harry!"
"Right, sorry. Go on."
"'And Death spoke to them. He was angry that he had been cheated out of the
three new victims, for travelers usually drowned in the river. But Death was cunning. He
pretended to congratulate the three brothers upon their magic, and said that each had
earned a prize for having been clever enough to evade him.
"'So the oldest brother, who was a combative man, asked for a wand more
powerful than any in existence: a wand that must always win duels for its owner, a wand
worthy of a wizard who had conquered Death! So Death crossed to an elder tree on the
banks of the river, fashioned a wand from a branch that hung there, and gave it to the
oldest brother.
"'Then the second brother, who was an arrogant man, decided that he wanted to
humiliate Death still further, and asked for the power to recall others from Death. So

But Harry hardly slept that night. The idea of the Deathly Hallows had taken
possession of him, and he could not rest while agitating thoughts whirled through his
mind: the wand, the stone, and the Cloak, if he could just possess them all...
I open at the close...But what was the close? Why couldn’t he have the stone
now? If only he had the stone, he could ask Dumbledore these questions in person...and
Harry murmured words to the Snitch in the darkness, trying everything, even
Parseltongue, but the golden ball would not open...
And the wand, the Elder Wand, where was that hidden? Where was Voldemort
searching now? Harry wished his scar would burn and show him Voldemort’s thoughts,
because for the first time ever, he and Voldemort were united in wanting the very same
thing...Hermione would not like that idea, of course...But then, she did not
believe....Xenophilius had been right, in a way...Limited, Narrow, Close-minded. The
truth was that she was scared of the idea of the Deathly Hallows, especially of the
Resurrection Stone...and Harry pressed his mouth again to the Snitch, kissing it, nearly
swallowing it, but the cold medal did not yield...
It was nearly dawn when he remembered Luna, alone in a cell in Azkaban,
surrounded by dementors, and he suddenly felt ashamed of himself. He had forgotten all
about her in his feverish contemplation of the Hallows. If only they could rescue her, but
dementors in those numbers would be virtually unassailable. Now he came to think about
it, he had not tried casting a Patronus with the blackthorn wand...He must try that in the
morning...
If only there was a way of getting a better wand...
And desire for the Elder Wand, the Deathstick, unbeatable, invincible, swallowed
him once more...
They packed up the tent next morning and moved on through a dreary shower of
rain. The downpour pursued them to the coast, where they pitched the tent that night, and
persisted through the whole week, through sodden landscapes that Harry found bleak and
depressing. He could think only of the Deathly Hallows. It was as though a flame had
been lit inside him that nothing, not Hermione’s flat disbelief nor Ron’s persistent doubts,
could extinguish. And yet the fiercer the longing for the Hallows burned inside him, the
less joyful it made him. He blamed Ron and Hermione: Their determined indifference
was as bad as the relentless rain for dampening his spirits, but neither could erode his
certainty, which remained absolute. Harry’s belief in and longing for the Hallows
consumed him so much that he felt isolated from the other two and their obsession with
the Horcruxes.
“Obsession?” said Hermione in a low fierce voice, when Harry was careless
enough to use the word one evening, after Hermione had told him off for his lack of
interest in locating more Horcruxes. “We’re not the one with an obsession, Harry! We’re
the ones trying to do what Dumbledore wanted us to do!”
But he was impervious to the veiled criticism. Dumbledore had left the sign of the
Hallows for Hermione to decipher, and he had also, Harry remained convinced of it, left
the Resurrection Stone hidden in the golden Snitch. Neither can live while the other
survives...master of Death...Why didn’t Ron and Hermione understand?
“’The last enemy shall be destroyed is death,’” Harry quoted calmly.
“I thought it was You-Know-Who we were supposed to be fighting?” Hermione
retorted, and Harry gave up on her.

He was flying facedown on the grond again. The smell of the forest filled his nostrils. He
could feel
the cold hard ground beneath his cheek, and the hinge of his glasses which have been
knocked sideways
by the fall cutting into his temple. Every inch of him ached, and the place where Killing
Curse had hit him
felt like the bruise of an iron-clad punch. He did not stir, but he remained exactly where
he had fallen, with
his left arm bent out at an akward angle and his mouth gaping.
He had expected to hear cheer of triumph and jubilation at his death, but instead
hurried footsteps,
whispers, and solicitous murmurs filled the air.
"My Lord... my Lord..."

It was Bellatrix's voice, and she spoke as if to a lover. Harry did not dare open his
eyes, but allowed
his other senses to explore his predicament. He knew that his wand was still stowed
beneath his robes because
he could feel it pressed between his chest and the ground. A slight cushioning effect in
the area of his stomach
told him that the Invisibility Cloak was also there, stuffed out of sight.
"My Lord..."
"That will do," said Voldemort's voice.
More footsteps. Several people were backing away from the same spot. Desperate
to see what was
happening and why, Harry opened his eyes by a milimeter.
Voldemort seemed to be getting to his feet. Various Death Eaters were hurrying
away from him,
returning to the crowd lining the clearing. Bellatrix alone remained behind, kneeling
beside Voldemort.
Harry closed his eyes again and considered what he had seen. The Death Eaters
have been buddled
around Voldemort, who seem to have fallen to the ground. Something had happened
when he had hit Harry with
the Killing Curse. Had Voldemort too collapsed? It seemed like it. And both of them had
briefly fallen unconcious
and both of them had now returned. . .
"My Lord, let me --"
"I do not require assitance," said Voldemort coldly, and though he could not see it,
Harry pictured
Bellatrix withdrawing a helpful hand. "The boy . . . Is he dead?"
There was a complete silence in the clearing. Nobody approached Harry, but he
felt their concentraded
gaze; it seemed to press him harder into the ground, and he was terrified a finger or an
eyelid might twitch.
"You," said Voldemort, and there was a bang and a small shrick of pain.
"Examine him. Tell me whether he is dead."
Harry did not know who had been sent to verify. He could only lie there, with his
heart thumping traitorously, and wait to be
examined, but at the same time nothing, small comfort through it was, that Voldemort
was wary of approaching him, that Voldemort
suspected that all had not gone to plan . . . .
Hands, softer than he had been expecting, touched Harry's face, and felt his heart.
He could hear the woman's fast breathing,
her pounding of life against his ribs.
"Is Draco alive? Is he in the castle?"
The whisper was barely audible, her lips were an inch from his car, her head bent
so low that her long hair shielded his face
from the onlookers.
"Yes," he breathed back.

He felt the hand on his chest contract: her nails pierced him. Then it was
withdrawn. She had sat up.
"He is dead!" Narcissa Malfoy called to the watchers.
And now they shouted, now they yelled in triumph and stamped their feet, and
through his eyelids, Harry saw bursts of red
and silver light shoot into the air in celebration.
Still feigning death on the ground, he understood. Narcissa knew that the only
way she would be permitted to enter Hogwarts,
and find her son, was as part of the conquering army. She no longer cared whether
Voldemort won.
"You see?" screeched Voldemort over the tumult. "Harry Potter is dead by my
hand, and no man alive can threaten me now!
Watch! Crucio!"
Harry had been expecting it, knew his body would not be allowed to remain
unsullied upon the forest floor; it must be subjected
to humiliation to prove Voldemort's victory. He was lifted into the air, and it took all his
determination to remain limp, yet the pain he
expected did not come. He was thrown once, twice, three times into the air. His glasses
flew off and he felt his wand slide a little beneath
his robes, but he kept himself floppy and lifeless, and when he fell no ground for the last
time, the clearing echoed with jeers and shrieks
of laughter.
"Now," said Voldemort, "we go to the castle, and show them what has become of
their hero. Who shall drag the body? No - Wait - "
There was a fresh outbreak of laughter, and after a few moments Harry felt the
ground trembling beneath him.
"You carry him," Voldemort said. "He will be nice and visible in your arms, will
he not? Pick up your little friend, Hagrid. And the
glasses - put on the glasses - he must be recognizable - "
Someone slammed Harry's glasses back onto his face with deliberate force, but
the enormous hands that lifted him into the air
were exceedingly gentle. Harry could feel Hagrid's arms trembling with the force of his
heaving sobs; great tears splashed down upon him
as Hagrid cradled Harry in his arms, and Harry did not dare, by movement or word, to
intimate to Hagrid that all was not, yet, lost.
"Move," said Voldemort, and Hagrid stumbled forward, forcing his way through
the close-growing trees, back through the forest.
Branches caught at Harry's hair and robes, but he lay quiescent, his mouth lolling open,
his eyes shut, and in the darkness, while the
Death Eaters croed all around them, and while Hagrid sobbed blindly, nobody looked to
see whether a pulse beat in the exposed neck of
Harry Potter. . . .
The two giants crashed along behind the Death Eaters; Harry could hear trees
creaking and falling as they passed; they made so
much din that birds toes shrieking into the sky, and even the jeers of the Death Eaters
were drowned. The victorious procession marched

on toward the open ground, and after a while Harry could tell, by the lightening of the
darkness through his closed eyelids, that the trees
were beginning to thin.
"BANE!"
Hagrid's unexpected bellow nearly forced Harry's eyes open. "Happy now, are
yeh, that yeh didn't fight, yeh cowardly bunch o' nags?
Are yeh happy Harry Potter's - d-dead . . . ?"
Hagrid could not continue, but broke down in fresh tears. Harry wondered how
many centaurs were watching their procession pass;
he dared not open his eyes to look. Some of the Death Eaters called insults at the centaurs
as they left them behind. A little later, Harry
sensed, by a freshening of the air, that they had reached the edge of the forest.
"Stop."
Harry thought that Hagrid must have been forced to obey Voldemort's command,
because he lurched a little. And now a chill settled
over them where they sood, and Harry heard the rasping breath of the dementors that
patrolled the other trees. They would not affect him now.
The fact of his own survival burned inside him, a talisman against them, as though his
father's stag kept guardian in his heart.
Someone passed close by Harry, and he knew that it was Voldemort himself
because he spoke a moment later, his voice magically
magnified so that it swelled through the ground, crashing upon Harry's eardrums.
"Harry Potter is dead. He was killed as he ran away, trying to save himself while
you lay down your lives for him. We bring you his
body as proof that your hero is gone.
"The battle is won. You have lost half of your fighters. My Death Eaters
outnumber you, and the Boy Who Lived is finished. There must
be no more war. Anyone who continues to resist, man, woman or child, will be
slaughtered, as will every member of their family. Come out of the
castle now, kneel before me, and you shall be spared. Your parents and children, your
brothers and sisters will live and be forgiven, and you will
join me in the new world we shall build togheter."
There was silence in the grounds and from the castle. Voldemort was so close to
him that Harry did not dare open his eyes again.
"Come," said Voldemort, and Harry heard him move ahead, and Hagrid was
forced to follow. Now Harry opened his eyes a fraction, and saw
Voldemort striding in front them, wearing the great snake Nagini around his shoulders,
now free of her enchanted cage. But Harry had no possibility
of extracting the wand concealed under his robes without being noticed by the Death
Eaters, who marched on the either side of them through the
slowly lightening darkness . . . .
"Harry," sobbed Hagrid. "Oh, Harry . . . Harry . . ."
Harry shut his eyes tight again. He knew that they were approaching the castle
and strained his ears to distinguish, above the gleeful voices
of the Death Eaters and their tramping footsteps, signs of life from those within.
"Stop."

The Death Eaters camte to a halt; Harry heard them spreading out in a line facing
the opne front doors of the school. He could see, even
though his closed lids, the teddish glow that meant light streamed upon him from the
entrance hall. He waited. Any moment, the people for whom
he had tried to die would see him, lying apparently dead, in Hagrid's arms.
"NO!"
The scream was the more terrible because he had never expected or dreamed that
Professor McGonagall could make such a sound. He heard
another women laughing nearby, and knew that Bellatrix gloried in McGonagall's despair.
He squinted again for a single second and saw the open
doorway filling with people, as the survivors of the battle came out onto the front steps
to face their vanquishers and see the truth of Harry's death for
themselves. He saw Voldemort standing a little in front of him, stroking Nagini's head
with a single white finger. He closed his eyes again.
"No!"
"No!"
"Harry! HARRY!"
Ron's, Hermione's, and Ginny's voices were worse than McGonagall's; Harry
wanted nothing more than to call back, yet he made himself lie
silent, and their cries acted like a trigger; the crowd of survivors took up the cause,
screaming and yelling abuse at the Death Eathers, until -
"SILENCE!" cried Voldemort, and there was a bang and a flash of bright light,
and silence was forced upn them all. "It is over! Set him down,
Hagrid, at my feet, where he belongs!"
Harry felt himself lowered onto the grass.
"You see? said Voldemort, and Harry felt him striding backward and forward
right beside the place where he lay. "Harry Potter is dead! Do you
understand now, deluded ones? He was nothing, ever, but a boy who relied on others to
sacrifice themselves for him!"
"He beat you!" yelled Ron, and the charm broke, and the defenders of Hogwarts
were shouting and screaming again until a second, more
powerful bang extinguished their voices once more.
"He was killed while trying to sneak out of the castle grounds," said Voldemort,
and there was a relish in his voice for the lie. "killed while trying
to save himself - "
But Voldemort broke off: Harry heard a scuffle and a shout, then another bang, a
flash of light, and grunt of pain; he opened his eyes an infinitesimal
amount. Someone had broken free of the crowd and charged at Voldemort: Harry saw the
figure hit the ground. Disarmed, Voldemort throwing the challenger's
wand aside and laughing.
"And who is this?" he said in his soft snake's hiss. "Who has volunteered to
demonstrate what happens to those who continue to fight when the
battle is lost?"
Bellatrix gave a delighted laugh.
"It is Neville Longbottom, my Lord! The boy who has been giving the Carrows so
much trouble! The son of the Aurors, remember?"

"Ah, yes, I remember," said Voldemort, looking down at Neville, who was
struggling back to his feet, unarmed and unproctected, standing in the
no-man's-land between the survivors and the Death Eaters. "But you are a pureblood,
aren't you, my brave boy? Voldemort asked Neville, who stood facing him,
his empty hands curled in fists.
"So what if I am?" said Neville loudly.
"You show spirit and bravery, and you come of noble stock. You will make a very
valuable Death Eater. We need your kind, Neville Longbottom."
"I'll join you when hell freezes over," said Neville. "Dumbledore's Army!" he
shouted, and there was an answering cheer from the crowd, whom
Voldemort's Silencing Charms seemed unable to hold.
"Very well," said Voldemort, and Harry heard more danger in the silkiness of his
voice than in the most powerful curse. "If that is your choice, Longbottom,
we revert to the original plan. On your head," he said quietly, "be it."
Still watching through his lashes, Harry saw Voldemort wave his wand. Seconds
later, out of one of the castle's shattered windows, something that looked like a
misshapen bird flew through the half light and landed in Voldemort's hand. He shook the
mildewed object by its pointed end and it dangled, emtpy and ragged: the Sorting Hat.
"There will be no more Sorting at Hogwarts School," said Voldemort. "There will
be no more Houses. The emblem, sheild and colors of my noble ancestor, Salazar
Slythering, will suffice everyone. Won't they, Neville Longbottom?"
He pointed his wand at Neville, who grew rigid and still, then forced the hat onto
Neville's head, so thta it slipped down below his eyes. There were movements from the
watching crowd in front of the castle, and as one, the Death Eaters raised their wands,
holding the fighters of Hogwarts at bay.
"Neville here is now going to demonstrate what happens to anyone foolish
enough to continue to oppose me," said Voldemort, and with a flick of his wand, he
caused the Sorting Hat to burst into flames.
Screams split the dawn, and Neville was a flame, rooted to the spot, unable to
move, and Harry could not bear it: He must act -
And then many things happened at the same moment.
They heard uproar from the distant boundary of the school as what sounded like
hundreds of people came swarming over the out-of-sight walls and pelted toward the
castle, uttering lowd war cries. At the same time, Grawp came lumbering around the side
of the castel and yelled, "HAGGER!" His cry was answered by roars from Voldemort's
giants: They ran at Grawp like bull elephants making the earth quake. Then came hooves
and the twangs of bows, and arrows were suddenly falling amongst the Death Eaters, who
broke ranks, shouting their surprise. Harry pulled the Invisibilty Cloak from inside his
robes, swunt it over himself, and sprang to his feet, as Neville moved too.
In one swift, fluid motin, Neville broke free of the Body-Bind Curse upon him;
the flaming har fell off him and he drew from its depths something silver, with a
glittering, rubied handle -
The slash of the silver blade could not be heard over the roar of the oncoming
crowd or the sounds of the clashing giants or of te stampending centaurs, and yet, it
seemd to draw every eye. With a single stroke Neville sliced off the great snake's head,
which spun high into the air, gleaming in the light flooding from the entrance hall, and

Voldemort's mouth was open in a scream of fury that nobody could hear, and the snake's
body thudded to the ground at his feet-
Hidden beneath the Invisibilty Cloak, Harry cast a Shield Charm between Neville
and Voldemort before the latter could raise his stamps of the battling giants, Hagrid's yell
came loudets of all.
"HARRY!" Hagrid shouted. "HARRY - WHERE'S HARRY?"
Chaos reigned. The charging centaurs were scattering the Death Eaters, everyone
was feeling the giants' stamping feet, and nearer and nearar thundered the reinforcements
that had come from who knew where; Harry saw great winget creatues soaring the heads
of Voldemort's giants, thestrals and Buckbeak the hippogriff scratching at their eyes
while Grawp punched and pummeled them and now the wizards, defenders of Hogwarts
and Death Eaters alike were being forced back into the castle. Harry was shooting jinxes
and curses at any Death Eater he could see, and they crumpled, not knowing what or who
had hit them, and their bodies were trampled by the retreating crowd. Still hidden beneath
the Invisibility Cloak, Harry was buffered into the entrance hall: He was searching for
Voldemort and saw him across the room, firing spells from his wand as he backed into
the Great Hall, still screaming instructions to his followers as he sent curses flying left
and right; Harry cast more Shield Charms, and Voldemort's would-be victims. Seamus
Finnigan and Hannah Abbott, datted past him into the Great Hall, where they joined the
fight already flourishing inside it.
And now there were more, even more people storming up the front steps, and
Harry saw Charlie Weasly overtaking Horace Slughorn, who was still wearing his emeral
pijamas. They seemed to have returned at the head of what looked like the families and
friends of every Hogwarts student who had remained to fight along with the shopkeeps
and homeowners of Hogsmeade. The centaurs Bane, Ronan and Magorian burst into the
hall with a great clatter of hooves, as behind Harry the door that led to the kitchens was
blasted off its hinges.
The house-elves of Hogwarts swarmed intot he entrance hall, screaming and
waving carving knives and cleaver, and at their head, the locker of Regulus Black
bouncing on his chest, was Kreacher, his bullfrog's voice audible even above this din:
"Fight! Fight! Fight for my Master, defender of house-elves! Fight the Dark Lord, in the
name of brave Regulus! Fight!"
They were hacking and stabbing at the ankles and shim of Death Eaters their tiny
faces alive with malice, and everywhere Harry looked Death Eaters were folding under
sheer weight of numbers, overcome by spells, dragging arrows from wounds, stabbed in
the leg by elves, or else simply attempting to escape, but swallowed by the oncoming
horde.
But it was not over yet: Harry sped between duelers, past atruggling prosoners,
and into he Great Hall.
Voldemort was in the center of the battle, and he was striking and smiting al
within reach. Harry could not get a clear shot, but fought his way nearer, still invisible,
and the Great Hall became more and more crowded as everyone who could walk forced
their way inside.
Harry saw Yaxley slammed tot he floor by George and Lee Jordan, saw Dolohov
fall with a scream at Flitwick's hands, saw Walden Macnair thrown across the room by
Hagrid, hit the stone wall opposite, and slide unconscious to the ground. He saw Ron and

Neville bringing down Fenrir Greyback. Aberforth Stunning Rookwood, Arthur and
Percy flooting Thicknesse, and Lucius and Narcissa Malfoy running through the crowd,
not even attempting to fight, screaming for their son.
Voldemort was now dueling McGonagall, Slughorn, Kingsley all at once, and
there was a cold hatred in his face as they wove and ducked around him, unable to finish
him -
Bellatrix was still fighing too, fifty yards away from Voldemort, and like her
master she dueled three at once: Hermione, Ginny and Luna, all battling their hardest, but
Bellatrix was equal to them, and Harry's attention was diverted as a Killing Curse shot so
close to Ginny that she missed death by an inch -
He changed course, running at Bellatrix rather than Voldemort, but before he had
gone a few steps he was knocked sideways.
"NOT MY DAUGHTER, YOU BITCH!"
Mrs. Weasley threw off her cloak as she ran, freeing her arms, Bellatrix spun on
the spot, roaring with laughter at the sight of the new challenger.
"OUT OF MY WAY!" shouted Mrs. Weasley to the three girls, and with a simple
swipe of her wand she began to duel. Harry watched with terror and elation as Molly
Weasley's wand slashed and twisted, and Bellatrix Lestrange's smile faltered and became
a snarl. Jets of light flew from both wands, the floor around the withces' feet became bot
and cracked; both woman were fighting to kill.
"No!" Mrs. Weasley cried as a few students ran forward, trying to come to her aid.
"Get back! Get back! She is mine!"
Hundreds of people now lined the walls, watching the two fights, Voldemort and
his three opponents, Bellatrix and Molly, and Harry stood, invisible, torn between both,
wanting to attack and yet to protect, unable to be sure that he would not hit the innocent.
"What will happen to your children when I've killed you?" taunted Bellatrix, as
mad as her master, capering as Molly's curses danced around her. "When Mummy's gone
the same way as Freddie?"
"You - will - never - touch - our - children - again!" screamed Mrs. Weasley.
Bellatrix laughed the same exhilarated laugh her cousin Sirius had given as he
toppled backward through the veil, and suddenly Harry knew what was going to happen
before it did.
Molly's curse soared beneath Bellatrix's constreched arm and hit her squarely in
the chest, directly over her heart.
Bellatrix's glounting smile froze, her eyes seemd to bulge: For the tiniest space of
time she knew what had happened, and then she toppled, and the watching crowd roared,
and Voldemord screamed.
Harry felt as though he turned into slow motin: he saw McGonagall, Kingsley and
Slughorn blasted backward, flailing and writhing through the air, as Voldemort's fury at
the fall of his last, best leutenant exploded with the force of a bomb, Voldemort raised his
wand and directed it at Molly Weasley.
"Protego!" roared Harry, and the Shield Charm expanded in the middle of the
Hall, and Voldemort stared around for the source as Harry pulled off the Invisibility
Cloak at last.
The yell of shock, the cheers, the screams on every side of :"Harry!" "HE'S
ALIVE!" were stifled at once. The crowd was afraid, and silence fell abruptly and

completely as Voldemort and Harry looked at each other, and began, at the same moment,
to circle each other.
"I don't want anyone else to help," Harry said loudly, and in the total silence his
voice carried like a trumpet call. "It's got to be like this. It's got to be me."
Voldemort hissed.
"Potter doesn't mean that," he said, his red eyes wide. "This isn't how he works, is
it? Who are you going to use as a shield today, Potter?"
"Nobody," said Harry simply. "There are no more Horcruxes. It's just you and me.
Neither can live while the other survives, and one of us is about to leave for good. . . ."
"One of us?" jeered Voldemort, and his wholy body was taut and his red eyes
stared, a snake that was about to strike. "You think it will be you, do you, the boy who
has survived by accident, and because Dumbledore was pulling the strings?"
"Accident, was it, when my mother died to save me?" asked Harry. They were
still moving sideways, both of them, in that perfect circle, maintaining the same distance
from each other, and for Harry no face existed but Voldemort's. "Accident, when I
decided to fight in that graveyard? Accident, that I didn't defend myself tonight, and still
survived, and returned to fight again?"
"Accidents!" screamed Voldemort, but still he did not strike, and the watching
crowd was frozen as if Petrified, and of the hundreds in the Hall, nobody seemed to
breathe but they two. "Accident and chance and the fact that you crouched and sniveled
behind the skirts of greater men and women, and permitted me to kill them for you!"
"You won't be killing anyone else tonight," said Harry as they circled, and stared
into each other's eyes, green into red. "You won't be able to kill any of them ever again.
Don't you get it? I was ready to die to stop you from hurting these people - "
"But you did not!"
" - I meant to, and that's what did it. I've done what my mother did. They're
protected from you. Haven't you noticed how none of the spells you put on them are
binding? You can't torture them. You can't touch them. You don't learn from your
mistakes, Riddle, do you?"
"You dare -"
"Yes, I dare," said Harry. "I know things you don't know, Tom Riddle. I know
lots of important things that you don't. Want to hear some, before you make another big
mistake?"
Voldemort did not speak, but powled in a circle, and Harry knew that he kept him
temporarily mesmerized at bay, held back by the faintest possibility that Harry might
indeed know a final secret. . . .
"Is it love again?" said Voldemort, his snake's face jeering. "Dumbledore favorite
solution, love, which he claimed conqered death, though love did not stop him falling
from the tower and breaking like and old waxwork? Love, which did not prevent me
stamping out your Modblood mother like a cockroack, Potter - and nobody seems to love
you enough to run forward this time and take my curse. So what will stop you dying now
when I strike?"
"Just one thing," said Harry, and still they circled each other, wrapped in each
other, held apart by nothing but the last secret.
"If it is not love that will save you this time," said Voldemort, "you must believe
that you have magic that i do not, or else a weapon more powerful than mine?"

"I believe both," said Harry, and he saw shock flit across the snakelike face,
though it was instantly dispelled; Voldemort began to laugh, and the sound was more
frightening than his screams; humorles and insane, it echoed around the silent Hall.
"You think you know more magic than I do?" he said. "Than I, than Lord
Voldemort, who has performed magic that Dumbledore himself never dreamed of?"
"Oh he dreamed of it," said Harry, "but he knew more than you, knew enough not
to do what you've done."
"You mean he was weak!" screamed Voldemort. "Too weak to dare, too weak to
take what might have been his, what will be mine!"
"No, he was cleverer than you," said Harry, "a better wizard, a better man."
"I brought about the death of Albus Dumbledore!"
"You thought you did," said Harry, "but you were wrong."
For the frist time, the watching crowd stirred as the hundreds of people around the
walls drew breath as one.
"Dumbledore is dead!" Voldemort hurled the words at Harry as in the marble
tomb in the grounds of this castle, I have seen it, Potter, and he will not return!"
"Yes, Dumbledore is dead," said Harry calmly, "but you didn't have him killed.
He chose his own manner of dying, chose it months before he died, arranged the whole
thing with the man you thought was your servant."
"What chldish dream is this?" said Voldemort, but still he did not strike, and his
red eyes did not waver from Harry's.
"Severus Snape wasn't yours," said Harry. "Snape was Dumbledore's.
Dumbledore's from the moment you starting hunting down my mother. And you never
realized it, because of the thing you can't understand. You never saw Snape cast a
Patronus, did you, Riddle?"
