'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to 
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for tonight at any rate.' 

'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before 
the break of day?' 

'I don't know,' answered Frodo. 'I fear those Black Riders, and I am 
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place to which 
it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to wait. But I should 
very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed 
when he heard that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends on two 
things. Flow soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how soon could 
we 

get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.' 

'The answer to the second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get 
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies 
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except for 
a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.' 

'It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But 
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?' 

'That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, if they found 
you here,' answered Merry. 'They could have reached here by now, of course, 
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the 
river -bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them 




through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they 
would try to keep them out, I think, at any rate until they got a message 
through to the Master of the Hall - for they would not like the look of the 
Riders, and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland 
cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in the 
morning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr. Baggins would be 
let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back to live 
at Crickhollow.' 

Frodo sat for a while in thought. 'I have made up my mind,' he said 
finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going 
by road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go through the 
North-gate my departure from Buckland will be known at once, instead of 
being secret for several days at least, as it might be. And what is more, 
the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainly be watched, 
whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We don't know how many there 
are; but there are at least two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is 
to go off in a quite unexpected direction.' 

'But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!' said Fredegar 
horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as 
Black Riders.' 

'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very desperate, but I believe Frodo 
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed at once. 

With luck we might gel a considerable start.' 

'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No 
one ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.' 

'Oh yes they do!' said Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in - occasionally 
when the fit takes them. We have a private entrance. Frodo went in once, 
long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when 
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.' 

'Well, do as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of the 
Old Forest than of anything I know about: the stories about it are a 
nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not going on the journey. 

Still, I am very glad someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what 
you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.' 

Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, 
nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from 
Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine 




Bridge. His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators, was 
to stay behind and deal with inquisitive folk, and to keep up as long as 
possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins was still living at Crickhollow. He 
had even brought along some old clothes of Frodo's to help him in playing 
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove. 

'Excellent!' said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ’We could not 
have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don't know whether 
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk 
a written message, in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty 
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we 
have gone, that decides me. I am going into the Old Forest first thing 
tomorrow.’ 

'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our 
job than Fatty's - waiting here till Black Riders come.' 

'You wait till you are well inside the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll 
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.' 

'It's no good arguing about it any more,' said Merry. 'We have still 
got to tidy up and put the finishing touches to the packing, before we get 
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.' 

When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some time. 

His legs ached. He. was glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually 
he fell into a vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking out of a high 
window over a dark sea of tangled trees. Down below among the roots there 
was the sound of creatures crawling and snuffling. He felt sure they would 
smell him out sooner or later. 

Then he heard a noise in the distance. At first he thought it was a 
great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then he knew that it was 
not leaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in 
waking life, though it had often troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he 
was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on a dark heath, 
and there was a strange salt smell in the air. Looking up he saw before him 
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over 
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge 
towards the tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and there was a 
noise of thunder. 

'Ah! The Ring! ' said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not 
a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for so small a 
thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House 
of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? ' 

Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught the strange 
gleam in Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind and friendly. 'It is 
best that it should lie hidden,' he answered. 

'As you wish. I care not,' said Boromir. 'Yet may I not even speak of 
it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of the Enemy: 
of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing, you say. Minas 
Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were 
with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? ' 

'Were you not at the Council? ' answered Frodo. 'Because we cannot use 
it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’ 

Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go on,' he cried. 
'Gandalf, Elrond — all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves 
they may be right. These elves and half-elves and wizards, they would come 
to grief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. 

But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not be corrupted. We 
of Minas Tirith have been staunch through long years of trial. We do not 
desire the power of wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, 
strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the 
-Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad 
not to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the 
ruthless, these alone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior do in 
this hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why 




not Boromir? The Ring would give me power of Command. How I would 
drive the 

hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!' 

Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed 
to have forgotten Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the 
mustering of men; and he drew plans for great alliances and glorious 
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mighty king, 
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms. 

'And they tell us to throw it away!' he cried. 'I do not say destroy 
it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope of doing so. It does 
not. The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halfling should walk 
blindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for 
himself. Folly! 

'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning now suddenly to Frodo 
again. 'You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should pardon 
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?' 

'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo. 'Simply afraid. But I am glad to have 
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.' 

'Then you will come to Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir. His eyes were 
shining and his face eager. 

'You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo. 

'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city 
is not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordor than from 
here. We have been long in the wilderness, and you need news of what the 
Enemy is doing before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he said. 
'You 

need rest before your venture, if go you must.’ He laid his hand on the 
hobbit's shoulder in friendly fashion; but Frodo felt the hand trembling 
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the 
tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength. 

'Why are you so unfriendly? ’ said Boromir. 'I am a true man, neither 
thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but I give you my 
word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at least let me make 
trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! ’ 

'No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.' 

'It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,’ cried Boromir. 

'How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death and 




mining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is the men of 
N®menor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might 
have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me ! ' 

Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great flat stone stood 
between them. 'Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why 
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt and fear? You can lay the 
blame on me, if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it by 
force. For I am too strong for you, halfling,' he cried; and suddenly he 
sprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face was 
hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes. 

Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was only 
one thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring upon its chain and 
quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him again. The 
Man gasped, stared for a moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking 
here and there among the rocks and trees. 

'Miserable trickster!' he shouted. 'Let me get my hands on you! Now I 
see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us all. You have 
only waited your chance to leave us in the lurch. Curse you and all 
halflings to death and darkness ! ' Then, catching his foot on a stone, he 
fell sprawling and lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his 
own curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept. 

He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away the tears. 

'What have I said? ' he cried. 'What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called. 
'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! ' 

There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was already 
far away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror and grief 
shook him, seeing in his thought the mad fierce face of Boromir, and his 
burning eyes. 

Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted, gasping 
for breath. He saw as through a mist a wide flat circle, paved with mighty 
flags, and surrounded with a crumbling battlement; and in the middle, set 
upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps. 

Up he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like a lost child that 
had clambered upon the throne of mountain -kings. 

At first he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of mist in 
which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon him. Then here and there 
the mist gave way and he saw many visions: small and clear as if they were 




under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright 
living images. The world seemed to have shrunk and fallen silent. He was 
sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men 
of N®menor. Eastward he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, 
and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great River lay like a 
ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountains stood small and hard as broken 
teeth. Westward he looked and saw the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, 
the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below 
his very feet the Great River curled like a toppling wave and plunged over 
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the 
fume. And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of 
sea-birds whirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green 
and silver sea, rippling in endless lines. 

But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The Misty Mountains 
were crawling like anthills: ores were issuing out of a thousand holes. 

Under the boughs of Mirkwood there was deadly strife of Elves and Men and 
fell beasts. The land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; 
smoke rose on the borders of Lurien. 

Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves poured from 
Isengard. From the havens of Harad ships of war put out to sea; and out of 
the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon 
horses, 

chariots of chieftains and laden wains. All the power of the Dark Lord was 
in motion. Then turning south again he beheld Minas Tirith. Far away it 
seemed, and beautiful: white-walled, many -towered, proud and fair upon its 
mountain- seat; its battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were 
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith 
was set another fortress, greater and more strong. Thither, eastward, 
unwilling his eye was drawn. It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the 
grinning gates of Minas Morgul. and the haunted Mountains, and it looked 
upon Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the Land of Mordor. Darkness lay 
there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, 
and 

a great reek rising. Then at last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, 
battlement upon battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, 
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw it: Barad-dyr, Fortress of Sauron. 

All hope left him. 




And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dark Tower that 
did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze. A fierce eager 
will was there. It leaped towards him; almost like a finger he felt it, 
searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where 
he was. Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon Tol Brandir he threw himself 
from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood. 

He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I come, I 
come to you ? He could not tell. Then as a flash from some other point of 
power there came to his mind another thought: Take it off! Take it off! 

Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring! 

The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced between 
their piercing points, he writhed, tormented. Suddenly he was aware of 
himself again. Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye: free to choose, and 
with one remaining instant in which to do so. He took the Ring off his 
finger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight before the high seat. A black 
shadow seemed to pass like an arm above him; it missed Amon Hen and 
groped 

out west, and faded. Then all the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in 
every tree. 

Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will was 
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. T will do now what I 
must,' he said. This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at 
work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more 
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too 
dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart 
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen 
into evil. I will go alone. At once.' 

He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn where Boromir 
had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he could hear cries and 
calls from the woods near the shore below. 

'They'll be hunting for me,' he said. T wonder how long I have been 
away. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can I do? ' he muttered. 

'I must go now or I shall never go. I shan't get a chance again. I hate 
leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But surely they will 
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?' 

Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He vanished and 
passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind. 




The others remained long by the river -side. For some time they had been 
silent, moving restlessly about; but now they were sitting in a circle, and 
they were talking. Every now and again they made efforts to speak of other 
things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn 
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, and the remnants of 
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border -land of the 
Emyn Muil: the stone kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great 
Stair beside the falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words 
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why 
was 

he hesitating? 

'He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’ said 
Aragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company 
to go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum, and must fear that the 
secret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas Tirith is no nearer to 
the Fire and the destruction of the Burden. 

'We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but the Lord 
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond 
his power: either to keep the Burden secret, or to hold off the full might 
of the Enemy when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choose in 
Frodo’s place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’ 

’Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ’Yet we must needs make up our 
minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call 
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.’ 

'And so should I,’ said Gimli. ’We, of course, were only sent to help 
the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us 
is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom. Hard was my parting 
from 

Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached the 
last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose 
Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.’ 

'And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. 'It would be faithless now 
to say farewell.’ 

’It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said Aragorn. ’But 
if he goes east, then all need not go with him; nor do I think that all 
should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two, 
or one alone. If you would let me choose, then I should appoint three 




companions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli; and myself. 
Boromir will return to his own city, where his father and his people need 
him; and with him the others should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, 
if Legolas is not willing to leave us.' 

'That won’t do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and 
I always intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But we did not 
realize what that would mean. It seemed different so far away, in the Shire 
or in Ri vendell. It would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why 
can't we stop him?' 

'We must stop him,' said Pippin. 'And that is what he is worrying 
about, I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And he doesn't 
like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to 
Mordor alone! ' Pippin shuddered. 'But the dear silly old hobbit, he ought 
to know that he hasn't got to ask. He ought to know that if we can't stop 
him, we shan't leave him.' 

'Begging your pardon,' said Sam. 'I don't think you understand my 
master at all. He isn't hesitating about which way to go. Of course not! 
What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your 
pardon, 

Master Boromir,' he added, and turned. It was then that they discovered that 
Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on the outside of the circle, 
was no longer there. 

'Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried. 'He's been a bit 
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's not in this business. He's off to 
his home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows 
he's got to find the Cracks of Doom, if he can. But he's afraid. Now it's 
come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of 
course he's had a bit of schooling, so to speak-we all have-since we left 
home, or he'd be so terrified he'd just fling the Ring in the River and 
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us 
either: whether we'll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That's 
another thing that's bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he'll 
want to go alone. Mark my words! We're going to have trouble when he 
comes 

back. For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.' 

'I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,' said Aragorn. 
'And what shall we do, if you prove right? ’ 




'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin. 

'I wonder? ' said Aragorn. 'He is the Bearer, and the fate of the 
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or 
the other. Nor do I think that we should succeed, if we tried. There are 
other powers at work far stronger.' 

'Well, I wish Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back, and let us 
get it over,' said Pippin. 'This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up? 

f 

'Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour is long passed. The morning is wearing 
away. We must call for him.' 

At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from the trees and 
walked towards them without speaking. His face looked grim and sad. He 
paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with 
his eyes on the ground. 

'Where have you been, Boromir? ’ asked Aragorn. 'Have you seen Frodo? ’ 

Boromir hesitated for a second. 'Yes, and no,’ he answered slowly. 

'Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged him to 
come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and he left me. He 
vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen before, though I have heard 
of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not find him again. I 
thought he would return to you.' 

'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and not 
too kindly at Boromir. 

'Yes,' he answered. 'I will say no more yet.’ 

'This is bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. 'I don't know what this Man has 
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn't ought to have; 
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!' 

'But he wouldn't keep it on' 1 said Merry. 'Not when he had escaped the 
unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.' 

'But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages 
now.' 

'How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. 

'Half an hour, maybe,' he answered. 'Or it might be an hour. I have 
wandered for some time since. I do not know! I do not know! ' He put his 
head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief. 

'An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. 'We must try and find him at 
once. Come on! ’ 




'Wait a moment! ' cried Aragorn. 'We must divide up into pairs, and 
arrange-here, hold on! Wait! ' 

It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off first. 
Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing westward into 
the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo ! in their clear, high 
hobbit- voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic or madness 
seemed to have fallen on the Company. 

'We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. 'Boromir! I do 
not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help now! Go after 
those two young hobbits, and guard them at the least, even if you cannot 
find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I 
shall return soon.' 

Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as he 
reached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling uphill, 
panting and calling, Frodo! 

'Come with me, Sam! ’ he said. 'None of us should be alone. There is 
mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen, 
to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went 
this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path. 

Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and 
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead. 
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head. 

'Whoa, Sam Gamgee! ’ he said aloud. 'Your legs are too short, so use 
your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not his way; but he 
hasn't told us everything. Something scared Mr. Frodo badly. He screwed 
himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his mind at last to go. Where 
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel 
hard.' 

Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears. 'Steady, 
Gamgee! ' he said. 'Think, if you can! He can't fly across rivers, and he 
can't jump waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's got to get back to the 
boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning! ' 

Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up 
he got and ran on. He came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen by the 
shore, where the boats were drawn up out of the water. No one was there. 
There seemed to be cries in the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He 
stood gazing for a moment, stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the 




bank all by itself. With a shout Sam raced across the grass. The boat 
slipped into the wat 



128d 



er. 

'Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! ' called Sam, and flung himself from the 
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a yard. With a cry 
and a splash he fell face downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went 
under, and the River closed over his curly head. 

An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and 
the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam by the hair as he 
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes. 

'Up you come, Sam my lad! ’ said Frodo. 'Now take my hand! ' 

'Save me, Mr. Frodo! ’ gasped Sam. 'I'm drownded. I can’t see your 
hand.’ 

'Here it is. Don't pinch, lad! I won’t let you go. Tread water and 
don’t flounder, or you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of the side, 
and let me use the paddle! ' 

With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank, and Sam was 
able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the Ring and 
stepped ashore again. 

'Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ’ he said. 

’Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard! ’ said Sam shivering. 'That’s hard, trying 
to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed right, where would you be 
now? ’ 

'Safely on my way.’ 

'Safely! ’ said Sam. 'All alone and without me to help you? I couldn’t 
have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’ 

’It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said Frodo and I 
could not have borne that.’ 

'Not as certain as being left behind,’ said Sam. 

'But I am going to Mordor.’ 

'I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I’m coming 
with you.’ 

'Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, 'don’t hinder me! The others will be coming 
back at any minute. If they catch me here. I shall have to argue and 




explain, and I shall never have the heart or the chance to get off. But I 
must go at once. It's the only way.’ 

'Of course it is,' answered Sam. 'But not alone. I'm coming too, or 
neither of us isn’t going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.' 

Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart. 
'Leave one! 'he said. 'We'll need it. But you can't come like this without 
your gear or food or anything.' 

'Just hold on a moment, and I'll get my stuff!' cried Sam eagerly. 

'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping 
place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he 
emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a spare blanket, and some 
extra packages of food, and ran back. 

'So all my plan is spoilt! ’ said Frodo. 'It is no good trying to 
escape you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is 
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find 
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them 
again.' 

'Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam. 

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo 
paddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly away, down the 
western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the 
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it was hard 
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive 
the boat eastward towards the far shore. 

At length they came to land again upon the southern slopes of Amon 
Lhaw. There they found a shelving shore, and they drew the boat out, high 
above the water, and hid it as well as they could behind a great boulder. 

Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would 
bring them over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and down into the Land of 
Shadow. 




Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring. 

The second part is called THE TWO TOWERS, since the events recounted 
in it are dominated by ORTHANC, the citadel of Saruman, and the fortress 
o/MINAS MORGUL that guards the secret entrance to Mordor; it tells of 
the deeds and perils of all the members of the now sundered fellowship, until 
the coming of the Great Darkness. 

The third part tells of the last defence against the Shadow, and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in THE RETURN OF THE KING.
